ADAPTIVE_WINDOW_ALGORITHM.md, before:

# Adaptive Window Haplotype Estimation Algorithm

## Overview
The adaptive window algorithm is designed to estimate founder haplotype frequencies for a given genomic position by progressively expanding the analysis window while accumulating constraints from smaller windows. The key insight is that smaller windows may provide better founder separation, and these constraints can be carried forward to larger windows.

## Core Algorithm Steps

### 1. Progressive Window Expansion
Start with a small window (e.g., 10kb) and progressively expand to larger windows:
- Window sizes: 10kb → 25kb → 50kb → 100kb → 200kb → 500kb
- Each window is centered on the target position

### 2. Hierarchical Clustering at Each Window
For each window size:
1. **Extract founder genotype data** for all SNPs in the window
2. **Calculate pairwise distances** between founders using `dist(t(founder_matrix))`
3. **Perform hierarchical clustering** using `hclust()` 
4. **Cut the tree** at the specified `h_cutoff` using `cutree(hclust_result, h = h_cutoff)`
5. **Identify founder groups** based on the clustering

### 3. Smart Constraint Accumulation
The key innovation is carrying forward constraints only when meaningful changes occur:
- **Detect meaningful group changes**: Not just count, but check if group composition changed
- **Skip LSEI when groups unchanged**: Reuse previous constraints and results
- **Accumulate constraints progressively**: As groups split or reshuffle
- **Handle reshuffling gracefully**: Tree structure may change with more SNPs

### 4. Constraint Types
Two types of constraints are accumulated:

#### Group Constraints
For founder groups that cannot be separated in larger windows:
```
Group 1: B1 + B2 + B3 = 0.45  (from smaller window)
Group 2: B4 + B5 = 0.30       (from smaller window)
```

#### Individual Constraints  
For single founders that were isolated:
```
B6 = 0.15  (from smaller window)
B7 = 0.08  (from smaller window)
B8 = 0.02  (from smaller window)
```

### 5. Constrained Least Squares Estimation
At each window, solve:
```
minimize ||A*x - b||^2
subject to:
  E*x = F  (equality constraints from accumulated constraints)
  G*x >= H (inequality constraints: all frequencies >= 0.0003)
  sum(x) = 1 (frequencies sum to 1)
```

Where:
- `A` = founder genotype matrix for current window
- `b` = sample frequencies for current window
- `E, F` = accumulated constraints from smaller windows
- `G, H` = non-negativity constraints

### 6. Convergence Criteria
The algorithm stops when:
- **All founders are separated** (n_groups == n_founders) - **OPTIMAL OUTCOME**
- **Maximum window size reached** (500kb) without full separation - **SUBOPTIMAL BUT VALID**
- **No meaningful group changes** across multiple window sizes

## Key Parameters

### h_cutoff
- Controls the "height" at which the hierarchical clustering tree is cut
- Lower values (e.g., 4) = more aggressive grouping = fewer founder groups
- Higher values (e.g., 10) = less aggressive grouping = more founder groups
- Should produce different results for different values

### Window Sizes
- Start small (10kb) for better founder separation
- Expand progressively to capture more SNPs
- Balance between statistical power and founder distinguishability

## Expected Behavior

### With Different h_cutoff Values
- **h4**: More aggressive grouping → fewer founder groups → more constrained estimates
- **h10**: Less aggressive grouping → more founder groups → less constrained estimates
- **Result**: Different founder frequency estimates for different h_cutoff values

### Progressive Improvement
- **Smaller windows**: Better founder separation, less statistical power
- **Larger windows**: More statistical power, potentially different tree structure
- **Tree adaptation**: Structure may change (reshuffling) as more SNPs are included
- **Accumulated constraints**: Preserve good separation from smaller windows

## Algorithm Advantages

1. **Adaptive**: Window size adapts to local genomic structure
2. **Constraint-preserving**: Good founder separation from small windows is preserved
3. **Statistically robust**: Larger windows provide more data for estimation
4. **Parameter-controlled**: h_cutoff allows tuning of grouping aggressiveness
5. **Resilient**: Handles tree reshuffling gracefully as statistical power increases

## Implementation Notes

### Critical Components
1. **Hierarchical clustering** must be performed at each window
2. **Smart constraint detection** must identify meaningful group changes
3. **Constraint accumulation** must preserve group and individual constraints
4. **LSEI solver** must handle the accumulated constraint matrix
5. **Progress tracking** must monitor group composition across windows

### Common Pitfalls
1. **Redundant constraints**: Adding sum=1 constraint when all founders are grouped
2. **Unnecessary LSEI calls**: Running solver when groups haven't changed
3. **Wrong constraint formulation**: Not properly translating groups to constraints
4. **Ignoring reshuffling**: Not adapting to tree structure changes

### Handling Edge Cases
1. **No separation achieved**: Return best result from largest window
2. **Tree reshuffling**: Adapt constraints and continue
3. **Insufficient SNPs**: Skip window or return NA
4. **LSEI failures**: Continue to next window size

## Current Status

### Bug Identified and Fixed ✅
**The redundant constraint bug has been identified and fixed in the production code:**

1. **Root Cause**: The 10kb window (1 founder group) was adding a redundant "sum=1" constraint that was already enforced by the base constraint system.

2. **The Problem**: This redundant constraint caused matrix singularity and LSEI failures, leading to identical results across all h_cutoff values.

3. **The Fix Implemented**: 
   - Added `groups_changed()` function to detect meaningful group composition changes
   - Only run LSEI and accumulate constraints when groups meaningfully change
   - Skip redundant constraint accumulation when all founders are in one group

4. **Verification**: Test script confirmed the fix works - h4 vs h10 now produce different results with frequency differences of 0.055-0.118.

### Production Code Status
**The current production version (`scripts/REFALT2haps.AdaptWindow.Single.R`) now has the fixed constraint logic:**

- ✅ **Full hierarchical clustering algorithm** implemented
- ✅ **Progressive window expansion** working correctly
- ✅ **Smart constraint accumulation** - only when groups meaningfully change
- ✅ **Redundant constraint bug** fixed
- 🔄 **Pipeline re-execution** in progress with fixed code

### Expected Results
With the bug fix, the algorithm should now:
- **Produce different results** for different h_cutoff values (h4, h6, h8, h10)
- **Show meaningful clustering** effects across the parameter range
- **Process full chromosome** coverage (not just 2429 positions)
- **Demonstrate adaptive behavior** as intended

### Next Steps
1. **Monitor current pipeline** - Adaptive window jobs are running with fixed code
2. **Verify different performance** across h_cutoff values once pipeline completes
3. **Extend to other chromosomes** using the working algorithm
4. **Parameter optimization** - find optimal h_cutoff values for JUICE dataset

Commit message:

CORRECT ALGORITHM: Always run LSEI, then check distinguishability
- Fixed fundamental logic: LSEI runs ALWAYS (if enough SNPs)
- Distinguishability check is separate quality control step
- Output: Both haplotype frequencies AND quality flag
- estimate_OK: 1=reliable, 0=unreliable, NA=LSEI failed
- Updated: production scripts, test scripts, algorithm documentation
- Now matches intended algorithm: get estimates even if unreliable

ADAPTIVE_WINDOW_ALGORITHM.md, after:

# Adaptive Window Haplotype Estimation Algorithm

## Overview
The adaptive window algorithm is designed to estimate founder haplotype frequencies for a given genomic position by progressively expanding the analysis window while accumulating constraints from smaller windows. The key insight is that smaller windows may provide better founder separation, and these constraints can be carried forward to larger windows.

## Core Algorithm Steps

### 1. Progressive Window Expansion
Start with a small window (e.g., 10kb) and progressively expand to larger windows:
- Window sizes: 10kb → 25kb → 50kb → 100kb → 200kb → 500kb
- Each window is centered on the target position

### 2. LSEI Haplotype Estimation (Always Run)
For each optimal window size:
1. **Extract data**: Founder and sample frequencies for SNPs in window
2. **Run LSEI**: Constrained least squares to get B1, B2, ..., AB8 frequencies
3. **Constraints**: Sum to 1, non-negative, lower bound 0.0003
4. **Output**: Actual haplotype frequencies (may be unreliable if founders not distinguishable)

### 3. Hierarchical Clustering Quality Check
For founder distinguishability assessment:
1. **Extract founder genotype data** for all SNPs in the window
2. **Calculate pairwise distances** between founders using `dist(t(founder_matrix))`
3. **Perform hierarchical clustering** using `hclust()` 
4. **Cut the tree** at the specified `h_cutoff` using `cutree(hclust_result, h = h_cutoff)`
5. **Check distinguishability**: estimate_OK = 1 if all founders separated, 0 if not

### 3. Smart Constraint Accumulation
The key innovation is carrying forward constraints only when meaningful changes occur:
- **Detect meaningful group changes**: Not just count, but check if group composition changed
- **Skip LSEI when groups unchanged**: Reuse previous constraints and results
- **Accumulate constraints progressively**: As groups split or reshuffle
- **Handle reshuffling gracefully**: Tree structure may change with more SNPs

### 4. Constraint Types
Two types of constraints are accumulated:

#### Group Constraints
For founder groups that cannot be separated in larger windows:
```
Group 1: B1 + B2 + B3 = 0.45  (from smaller window)
Group 2: B4 + B5 = 0.30       (from smaller window)
```

#### Individual Constraints  
For single founders that were isolated:
```
B6 = 0.15  (from smaller window)
B7 = 0.08  (from smaller window)
B8 = 0.02  (from smaller window)
```

### 5. Constrained Least Squares Estimation
At each window, solve:
```
minimize ||A*x - b||^2
subject to:
  E*x = F  (equality constraints from accumulated constraints)
  G*x >= H (inequality constraints: all frequencies >= 0.0003)
  sum(x) = 1 (frequencies sum to 1)
```

Where:
- `A` = founder genotype matrix for current window
- `b` = sample frequencies for current window
- `E, F` = accumulated constraints from smaller windows
- `G, H` = non-negativity constraints

### 6. Convergence Criteria
The algorithm stops when:
- **All founders are separated** (n_groups == n_founders) - **OPTIMAL OUTCOME**
- **Maximum window size reached** (500kb) without full separation - **SUBOPTIMAL BUT VALID**
- **No meaningful group changes** across multiple window sizes

## Key Parameters

### h_cutoff
- Controls the "height" at which the hierarchical clustering tree is cut
- Lower values (e.g., 4) = more aggressive grouping = fewer founder groups
- Higher values (e.g., 10) = less aggressive grouping = more founder groups
- Should produce different results for different values

### Window Sizes
- Start small (10kb) for better founder separation
- Expand progressively to capture more SNPs
- Balance between statistical power and founder distinguishability

## Expected Behavior

### With Different h_cutoff Values
- **h4**: More aggressive grouping → fewer founder groups → more constrained estimates
- **h10**: Less aggressive grouping → more founder groups → less constrained estimates
- **Result**: Different founder frequency estimates for different h_cutoff values

### Progressive Improvement
- **Smaller windows**: Better founder separation, less statistical power
- **Larger windows**: More statistical power, potentially different tree structure
- **Tree adaptation**: Structure may change (reshuffling) as more SNPs are included
- **Accumulated constraints**: Preserve good separation from smaller windows

## Algorithm Advantages

1. **Adaptive**: Window size adapts to local genomic structure
2. **Constraint-preserving**: Good founder separation from small windows is preserved
3. **Statistically robust**: Larger windows provide more data for estimation
4. **Parameter-controlled**: h_cutoff allows tuning of grouping aggressiveness
5. **Resilient**: Handles tree reshuffling gracefully as statistical power increases

## Implementation Notes

### Critical Components
1. **Hierarchical clustering** must be performed at each window
2. **Smart constraint detection** must identify meaningful group changes
3. **Constraint accumulation** must preserve group and individual constraints
4. **LSEI solver** must handle the accumulated constraint matrix
5. **Progress tracking** must monitor group composition across windows

### Common Pitfalls
1. **Redundant constraints**: Adding sum=1 constraint when all founders are grouped
2. **Unnecessary LSEI calls**: Running solver when groups haven't changed
3. **Wrong constraint formulation**: Not properly translating groups to constraints
4. **Ignoring reshuffling**: Not adapting to tree structure changes

### Handling Edge Cases
1. **No separation achieved**: Return best result from largest window
2. **Tree reshuffling**: Adapt constraints and continue
3. **Insufficient SNPs**: Skip window or return NA
4. **LSEI failures**: Continue to next window size

## Current Status

### Bug Identified and Fixed ✅
**The redundant constraint bug has been identified and fixed in the production code:**

1. **Root Cause**: The 10kb window (1 founder group) was adding a redundant "sum=1" constraint that was already enforced by the base constraint system.

2. **The Problem**: This redundant constraint caused matrix singularity and LSEI failures, leading to identical results across all h_cutoff values.

3. **The Fix Implemented**: 
   - Added `groups_changed()` function to detect meaningful group composition changes
   - Only run LSEI and accumulate constraints when groups meaningfully change
   - Skip redundant constraint accumulation when all founders are in one group

4. **Verification**: Test script confirmed the fix works - h4 vs h10 now produce different results with frequency differences of 0.055-0.118.

### Production Code Status
**The current production version (`scripts/REFALT2haps.AdaptWindow.Single.R`) now has the fixed constraint logic:**

- ✅ **Full hierarchical clustering algorithm** implemented
- ✅ **Progressive window expansion** working correctly
- ✅ **Smart constraint accumulation** - only when groups meaningfully change
- ✅ **Redundant constraint bug** fixed
- 🔄 **Pipeline re-execution** in progress with fixed code

### Expected Results
With the bug fix, the algorithm should now:
- **Produce different results** for different h_cutoff values (h4, h6, h8, h10)
- **Show meaningful clustering** effects across the parameter range
- **Process full chromosome** coverage (not just 2429 positions)
- **Demonstrate adaptive behavior** as intended

### Next Steps
1. **Monitor current pipeline** - Adaptive window jobs are running with fixed code
2. **Verify different performance** across h_cutoff values once pipeline completes
3. **Extend to other chromosomes** using the working algorithm
4. **Parameter optimization** - find optimal h_cutoff values for JUICE dataset
