CURRENT_STATUS.md, before:

# CURRENT STATUS - XQTL2 Exploration Project

## ⚠️ **CRITICAL WORKFLOW CONSTRAINT** ⚠️

**This is a CLUSTER-BASED project. Local terminal access is severely limited:**

- **Data processing happens on the cluster** (HPC system)
- **Local development is script-only** - cannot access cluster data or run cluster jobs
- **File paths in CURRENT_STATUS.md refer to CLUSTER file structure**, not local
- **Pipeline execution requires cluster access** via `sbatch` commands
- **Results analysis requires cluster access** to read .RDS files

**Why this matters**: I cannot run `ls`, check file contents, or debug cluster issues from the local terminal. All cluster operations must be documented in CURRENT_STATUS.md for reference.

## 🚨 **LAWS OF ROBOTICS - CODE CHANGES** 🚨

**BEFORE MAKING ANY CODE CHANGE, I MUST ALWAYS CHECK THIS CHECKLIST:**

### **The 12-Step Code Change Protocol:**

1. **"Is this code currently working?"** - If YES, DON'T TOUCH IT
2. **"Has it been working for days/weeks?"** - If YES, DON'T TOUCH IT  
3. **"Am I trying to 'improve' something that works?"** - If YES, DON'T TOUCH IT
4. **"What actually broke, and when?"** - Find the real problem first
5. **"Is there working code I can compare against?"** - Use it as reference
6. **"Can I make a small, targeted fix instead of rewriting?"** - If YES, do that
7. **"Do I understand why the current code works?"** - If NO, DON'T TOUCH IT
8. **"Have I tested this change thoroughly?"** - If NO, DON'T DEPLOY IT
9. **"Do I have a backup of the working version?"** - If NO, DON'T CHANGE IT
10. **"Am I solving the user's actual problem?"** - Or just my perceived problem?
11. **"What's the worst that could happen if I'm wrong?"** - Consider the consequences
12. **"Should I ask the user first?"** - When in doubt, ASK

### **The Golden Rule:**
**"If it works, DON'T FIX IT. If it's broken, fix ONLY what's broken."**

### **Why This Matters:**
**I have a destructive tendency to delete working code and then spend days debugging my own unnecessary changes. This checklist prevents that.**

---

## Current Phase: Phase 4 (Method evaluation and comparison) + Pipeline Re-execution

**Status**: Adaptive window haplotype estimation + SNP imputation jobs are running on the cluster with the fixed production code.

**Current Position in Pipeline Cycle**: 
- ✅ **DEBUGGING COMPLETE** - Redundant constraint bug identified and fixed
- 🔄 **RUN ANALYSIS** - Adaptive window haplotype estimation + SNP imputation in progress (array elements 6-9)
- ⏳ **MONITOR COMPLETION** - Use summarize script to check pipeline status
- ⏳ **EVALUATE RESULTS** - Use evaluation script to confirm different performance across h_cutoff values

## Recent Progress (Last 24 hours)

### ✅ Completed Tasks
1. **Full pipeline execution** - Haplotype estimation and SNP imputation completed for chr2R
2. **Comprehensive method evaluation** - All 12 estimators (6 fixed + 6 adaptive) evaluated
3. **Sliding window analysis integration** - Regional performance analysis (250 SNP windows, 50 SNP steps)
4. **Performance optimization** - Sliding window calculation optimized with vectorized tidyverse operations
5. **Documentation updates** - ADAPTIVE_WINDOW_ALGORITHM.md created and updated
6. **Bug identification and fix** - Redundant constraint bug identified and fixed in production code
7. **Code cleanup** - Debugging scripts moved to debug_and_testing folder

### 🔧 Bug Fix Completed ✅

**The Problem**: All adaptive window methods (h4, h6, h8, h10) were producing identical haplotype estimates due to redundant constraint accumulation.

**Root Cause**: The 10kb window (1 founder group) was adding a redundant "sum=1" constraint that was already enforced, causing matrix singularity and LSEI failures.

**The Fix**: Implemented smart constraint detection that only runs LSEI and accumulates constraints when groups meaningfully change (not just count, but composition).

**Verification**: Test script confirmed the fix works - h4 vs h10 now produce different results:
- Position 1.5e+07: Max frequency difference = 0.055465
- Position 2e+07: Max frequency difference = 0.118146

### 🚀 Pipeline Re-execution - IN PROGRESS

**Production Code Updated**: `scripts/REFALT2haps.AdaptWindow.Single.R` now has the fixed constraint logic.

**Current Status**: Adaptive window haplotype estimation jobs are running (array elements 6-9).

**Expected Results**: Different h_cutoff values should now produce different performance metrics, resolving the mystery of identical cluster results.

## Key Findings

### Adaptive Window Algorithm
- **IS working correctly** in current production code
- **Progressive window expansion** with hierarchical clustering
- **Smart constraint accumulation** - only when groups meaningfully change
- **Bug fixed**: No more redundant constraint accumulation

### Performance Results (Previous Run)
- **Fixed windows**: 10kb performs best, larger windows degrade performance
- **Adaptive windows**: Superior to fixed windows across all metrics
- **All adaptive methods identical**: This was due to the constraint bug (now fixed)

## ⚠️ CRITICAL WARNING - Adaptive Window Code

**The adaptive window algorithm in `scripts/REFALT2haps.AdaptWindow.Single.R` is now working correctly after fixing the redundant constraint bug. DO NOT edit this code without understanding the big picture.**

### What We Are Trying to Achieve
1. **Progressive window expansion** - Start small (10kb) and grow to capture optimal founder separation
2. **Hierarchical clustering** - Use `h_cutoff` parameter to control founder grouping aggressiveness
3. **Smart constraint accumulation** - Preserve good founder separation from smaller windows
4. **Different results for different h_cutoff values** - This is the core goal that was broken before

### Why This Code is Critical
- **This is the core algorithm** for adaptive window haplotype estimation
- **It took significant debugging** to identify and fix the redundant constraint bug
- **Random edits can break the entire pipeline** and lose weeks of work
- **The algorithm works correctly now** - don't change it without understanding what it does

### What NOT to Do
- ❌ **Don't randomly change constraint logic** without understanding the algorithm
- ❌ **Don't modify the hierarchical clustering** without understanding why it's there
- ❌ **Don't change the window expansion logic** without understanding the progression
- ❌ **Don't edit this file** unless you're fixing a specific, identified bug

### What TO Do Instead
- ✅ **Read ADAPTIVE_WINDOW_ALGORITHM.md** to understand the algorithm
- ✅ **Test changes on small datasets** before modifying production code
- ✅ **Verify that different h_cutoff values still produce different results**
- ✅ **Document any changes** and why they were necessary

**Remember: The goal is to have an adaptive window algorithm that produces meaningfully different results for different h_cutoff values, not to randomly modify code that's already working.**

## Next Steps

### Current Phase (Next 4-8 hours)
1. **✅ Bug fix completed** - Production code updated with smart constraint logic
2. **🔄 Haplotype estimation + SNP imputation running** - Adaptive window methods (h4, h6, h8, h10) with `run_imputation=yes`
3. **Monitor progress** - Use summarize script to check pipeline status
4. **Wait for completion** - Both haplotype estimation and SNP imputation are running together

### Immediate Next (Next 1-2 days)
1. **Monitor pipeline completion** - Use `summarize_pipeline_results.R` to check status
2. **Evaluate results** - Use `evaluate_haplotype_methods.R` to confirm different performance across h_cutoff values
3. **Compare with previous results** - Demonstrate the bug fix worked
4. **Verify SNP imputation** - Check that imputed frequencies are reasonable

### Short Term (Next 3-5 days)
1. **Parameter optimization** - find optimal h_cutoff values for JUICE dataset
2. **Method comparison** - comprehensive evaluation of fixed vs adaptive methods
3. **Extend to other chromosomes** (chr2L, chr3L, chr3R, chrX)
4. **Genome-wide analysis** using best performing methods

### Medium Term (Next week)
1. **Performance profiling** - runtime and accuracy trade-offs across genome
2. **Documentation** - final algorithm description and usage guide
3. **Pipeline optimization** - streamline for large-scale analysis

## Technical Details

### Files Modified Today
- `scripts/REFALT2haps.AdaptWindow.Single.R` - **FIXED** redundant constraint bug
- `scripts/debug_and_testing/` - **ORGANIZED** all debugging scripts
- `ADAPTIVE_WINDOW_ALGORITHM.md` - Comprehensive algorithm documentation
- `CURRENT_STATUS.md` - This file, updated with current status



## Workflow Constraints

### Cluster Access
- **Results stay on cluster** - cannot download large .RDS files locally
- **Local development** - scripts developed locally, tested on cluster
- **Version control** - git push/pull for code synchronization
- **Local terminal commands limited** - cannot access cluster data or run cluster jobs locally

### Git Workflow Preferences
- **Preferred workflow**: `git add . && git commit -m "message" && git push origin main` (single command)
- **Avoid separate commands** - user prefers efficiency over step-by-step execution
- **Commit messages** should be descriptive and explain what was changed and why

### Data Processing
- **Raw REFALT files** - direct processing, no intermediate files
- **Euchromatin boundaries**:
  - chr2L: 82,455 to 22,011,009 bp
  - chr2R: 5,398,184 to 24,684,540 bp (current focus)
  - chr3L: 158,639 to 22,962,476 bp
  - chr3R: 4,552,934 to 31,845,060 bp
  - chrX: 277,911 to 22,628,490 bp
- **10kb step intervals** - comprehensive chromosome coverage

## Recent Debugging Insights - RESOLVED ✅

### The Redundant Constraint Bug - RESOLVED ✅
**What Was Happening**:
1. 10kb window: All founders in 1 group → added constraint "sum=1"
2. This constraint was **redundant** with the base constraint already enforced
3. **Matrix singularity** occurred due to colinear rows
4. LSEI failed or behaved unexpectedly, causing identical results

**The Fix Applied**:
- Only accumulate constraints when groups meaningfully change
- Skip LSEI when groups unchanged, reuse previous constraints
- Detect meaningful changes by group composition, not just count
- **Production code updated** with smart constraint detection

**Verification Results**:
- **h4 vs h10 now produce different results** (frequency differences: 0.055-0.118)
- **Algorithm working as designed** - different h_cutoff values matter
- **Pipeline re-execution in progress**

## Current Questions - RESOLVED ✅

1. **✅ Is the redundant constraint bug the root cause** of identical cluster results? **YES**
2. **✅ Will fixing this bug** restore different performance across h_cutoff values? **YES**
3. **✅ Should we update production code** or just test the fix locally first? **PRODUCTION CODE UPDATED**
4. **✅ What's the best approach** for detecting meaningful group changes? **IMPLEMENTED**

## Success Metrics

### Algorithm Working Correctly - COMPLETED ✅
- [x] Different h_cutoff values produce different results (verified in test)
- [x] Progressive window expansion shows meaningful group changes
- [x] Constraint accumulation works without matrix issues
- [x] Full founder separation achieved or max window size reached
- [x] **Bug fix implemented** in production code

### Pipeline Performance - IN PROGRESS 🔄
- [x] Bug fixed and production code updated
- [🔄] Haplotype estimation running for adaptive methods
- [ ] Different performance metrics across h_cutoff values (expected now)
- [ ] Reasonable runtime (not stuck in "doom loops")
- [ ] Full chromosome coverage achieved

### Code Quality - COMPLETED ✅
- [x] No redundant constraints
- [x] Smart LSEI execution (only when needed)
- [x] Proper error handling and edge cases
- [x] Clear documentation and testing
- [x] **Code cleanup completed** - debugging scripts organized

## Current Pipeline Status

**Status**: Bug fixed, production code updated, adaptive window haplotype estimation **RUNNING**.

**Current Jobs**: Array elements 6-9 (adaptive h4, h6, h8, h10) are processing.

**Next Steps**:
1. **Monitor haplotype estimation jobs** until completion
2. **Run SNP imputation** for all adaptive methods
3. **Re-evaluate results** to verify different performance across h_cutoff values
4. **Extend to other chromosomes** once chr2R is validated

**Expected Outcome**: Different performance metrics across h_cutoff values, resolving the mystery of identical adaptive window results.

### 8. File Structure
```
.
├── ADAPTIVE_WINDOW_ALGORITHM.md
├── CURRENT_STATUS.md
├── data/
│   ├── founders/
│   ├── NOT_founders/
│   └── raw/
├── helpfiles/
│   ├── flymap.r6.txt
│   ├── founder.bams.txt
│   ├── haplotype_params.2R.tsv
│   └── JUICE/
│       └── JUICE_haplotype_parameters.R
├── logs/                                # SLURM job logs (ROOT LEVEL)
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_1.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_1.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_2.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_2.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_3.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_3.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_4.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_4.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_5.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_5.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_6.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_6.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_7.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_7.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_8.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_8.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_9.err
│   └── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_9.out
├── process/
│   └── JUICE/
│       ├── haplotype_results/           # All results stored here
│       │   ├── adaptive_window_h10_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── adaptive_window_h4_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── adaptive_window_h6_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── adaptive_window_h8_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── fixed_window_100kb_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── fixed_window_200kb_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── fixed_window_20kb_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── fixed_window_500kb_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── fixed_window_50kb_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── haplotype_evaluation_detailed_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── haplotype_evaluation_plots_chr2R.png
│       │   ├── haplotype_evaluation_regional_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── haplotype_evaluation_summary_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── sliding_window_plot_chr2R.png
│       │   ├── sliding_window_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── sliding_window_summary_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_adaptive_h10_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_adaptive_h4_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_adaptive_h6_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_adaptive_h8_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_fixed_100kb_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_fixed_200kb_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_fixed_20kb_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_fixed_500kb_chr2R.RDS
│       │   └── snp_imputation_fixed_50kb_chr2R.RDS
│       └── RefAlt.chr2R.txt            # Raw REFALT data
├── ref/
├── scripts/
│   ├── debug_and_testing/              # Debugging scripts organized here
│   ├── haps2scan/
│   ├── raw2bam2REFALT/
│   ├── old_REFALT2haps/
│   ├── Heterozygosity_tests/
│   ├── REFALT2haps.AdaptWindow.Single.R
│   ├── evaluate_haplotype_methods.R
│   ├── REFALT2haps.FixedWindow.Single.R
│   ├── haplotype_testing_from_table.sh
│   └── euchromatic_SNP_imputation_single.R
```

**CRITICAL: Results are in `process/JUICE/haplotype_results/`, logs are in `logs/` (root level)**

## Complete Pipeline Commands - From Start to Finish

### 1. Run Full Pipeline (All Methods)
```bash
# Haplotype estimation + SNP imputation for ALL methods (array 1-9)
sbatch --array=1-9 scripts/haplotype_testing_from_table.sh helpfiles/haplotype_params.2R.tsv helpfiles/JUICE/JUICE_haplotype_parameters.R process/JUICE yes

# Haplotype estimation ONLY for ALL methods (array 1-9)
sbatch --array=1-9 scripts/haplotype_testing_from_table.sh helpfiles/haplotype_params.2R.tsv helpfiles/JUICE/JUICE_haplotype_parameters.R process/JUICE
```

### 2. Run Subset Pipeline (Current Run)
```bash
# Haplotype estimation + SNP imputation for ADAPTIVE methods only (array 6-9)
sbatch --array=6,7,8,9 scripts/haplotype_testing_from_table.sh helpfiles/haplotype_params.2R.tsv helpfiles/JUICE/JUICE_haplotype_parameters.R process/JUICE yes
```

### 3. Evaluate Results (After Pipeline Completes)
```bash
# Quick pipeline summary
Rscript scripts/summarize_pipeline_results.R process/JUICE chr2R

# Comprehensive evaluation
Rscript scripts/evaluate_haplotype_methods.R chr2R helpfiles/JUICE/JUICE_haplotype_parameters.R process/JUICE
```

### 4. Extend to Other Chromosomes
**To extend to other chromosomes, simply add rows to the existing parameter file:**

1. **Edit `helpfiles/haplotype_params.2R.tsv`** to add rows for other chromosomes
2. **Drop some estimation methods** to focus on finding optimal combinations
3. **Run the same pipeline command** - SLURM will process all rows in the file

**Note: The filename `haplotype_params.2R.tsv` is misleading since it will contain parameters for all chromosomes. Consider renaming to something like `haplotype_params.tsv` or `haplotype_params.all_chromosomes.tsv`.**

**Example parameter file structure:**
```tsv
chr2R	fixed	20
chr2R	fixed	50
chr2R	fixed	100
chr2R	adaptive	4
chr2R	adaptive	6
chr2L	fixed	50
chr2L	adaptive	6
chr3L	fixed	50
chr3L	adaptive	6
```

**Then run the full pipeline:**
```bash
sbatch --array=1-9 scripts/haplotype_testing_from_table.sh helpfiles/haplotype_params.2R.tsv helpfiles/JUICE/JUICE_haplotype_parameters.R process/JUICE yes
```

**The pipeline automatically processes all rows in the parameter file - no need for separate commands per chromosome.**

Commit message:

FIX: Copy working data transformation logic from fixed window script - properly filter and pivot founder data before haplotype estimation

CURRENT_STATUS.md, after:

# CURRENT STATUS - XQTL2 Exploration Project

## ⚠️ **CRITICAL WORKFLOW CONSTRAINT** ⚠️

**This is a CLUSTER-BASED project. Local terminal access is severely limited:**

- **Data processing happens on the cluster** (HPC system)
- **Local development is script-only** - cannot access cluster data or run cluster jobs
- **File paths in CURRENT_STATUS.md refer to CLUSTER file structure**, not local
- **Pipeline execution requires cluster access** via `sbatch` commands
- **Results analysis requires cluster access** to read .RDS files

**Why this matters**: I cannot run `ls`, check file contents, or debug cluster issues from the local terminal. All cluster operations must be documented in CURRENT_STATUS.md for reference.

## 🚨 **LAWS OF ROBOTICS - CODE CHANGES** 🚨

**BEFORE MAKING ANY CODE CHANGE, I MUST ALWAYS CHECK THIS CHECKLIST:**

### **The Practical Code Change Protocol:**

#### **BEFORE MAKING MAJOR CHANGES:**
1. **Make a backup** of the working code (git branch, copy file, etc.)
2. **Document what the code was doing right** - capture current behavior and metrics
3. **Document what you're trying to fix** - be specific about the actual problem
4. **Create tests that verify the main function still works** - baseline metrics

#### **AFTER MAKING CHANGES:**
1. **Run the same tests** that the working code passed
2. **Verify it still does its main function correctly**
3. **Check that performance metrics haven't degraded**
4. **Only commit if it passes all the original tests**

### **The Golden Rule:**
**"If it works, DON'T FIX IT. If it's broken, fix ONLY what's broken."**

### **Why This Matters:**
**I have a destructive tendency to delete working code and then spend days debugging my own unnecessary changes. This protocol prevents that by requiring backup, documentation, and testing before any major modification.**

### **The Key Insight:**
**Make a test of the code as it is working, record metrics, and then the new code has to at least pass those same checks before committing.**

---

## Current Phase: Phase 4 (Method evaluation and comparison) + Pipeline Re-execution

**Status**: Adaptive window haplotype estimation + SNP imputation jobs are running on the cluster with the fixed production code.

**Current Position in Pipeline Cycle**: 
- ✅ **DEBUGGING COMPLETE** - Redundant constraint bug identified and fixed
- 🔄 **RUN ANALYSIS** - Adaptive window haplotype estimation + SNP imputation in progress (array elements 6-9)
- ⏳ **MONITOR COMPLETION** - Use summarize script to check pipeline status
- ⏳ **EVALUATE RESULTS** - Use evaluation script to confirm different performance across h_cutoff values

## Recent Progress (Last 24 hours)

### ✅ Completed Tasks
1. **Full pipeline execution** - Haplotype estimation and SNP imputation completed for chr2R
2. **Comprehensive method evaluation** - All 12 estimators (6 fixed + 6 adaptive) evaluated
3. **Sliding window analysis integration** - Regional performance analysis (250 SNP windows, 50 SNP steps)
4. **Performance optimization** - Sliding window calculation optimized with vectorized tidyverse operations
5. **Documentation updates** - ADAPTIVE_WINDOW_ALGORITHM.md created and updated
6. **Bug identification and fix** - Redundant constraint bug identified and fixed in production code
7. **Code cleanup** - Debugging scripts moved to debug_and_testing folder

### 🔧 Bug Fix Completed ✅

**The Problem**: All adaptive window methods (h4, h6, h8, h10) were producing identical haplotype estimates due to redundant constraint accumulation.

**Root Cause**: The 10kb window (1 founder group) was adding a redundant "sum=1" constraint that was already enforced, causing matrix singularity and LSEI failures.

**The Fix**: Implemented smart constraint detection that only runs LSEI and accumulates constraints when groups meaningfully change (not just count, but composition).

**Verification**: Test script confirmed the fix works - h4 vs h10 now produce different results:
- Position 1.5e+07: Max frequency difference = 0.055465
- Position 2e+07: Max frequency difference = 0.118146

### 🚀 Pipeline Re-execution - IN PROGRESS

**Production Code Updated**: `scripts/REFALT2haps.AdaptWindow.Single.R` now has the fixed constraint logic.

**Current Status**: Adaptive window haplotype estimation jobs are running (array elements 6-9).

**Expected Results**: Different h_cutoff values should now produce different performance metrics, resolving the mystery of identical cluster results.

## Key Findings

### Adaptive Window Algorithm
- **IS working correctly** in current production code
- **Progressive window expansion** with hierarchical clustering
- **Smart constraint accumulation** - only when groups meaningfully change
- **Bug fixed**: No more redundant constraint accumulation

### Performance Results (Previous Run)
- **Fixed windows**: 10kb performs best, larger windows degrade performance
- **Adaptive windows**: Superior to fixed windows across all metrics
- **All adaptive methods identical**: This was due to the constraint bug (now fixed)

## ⚠️ CRITICAL WARNING - Adaptive Window Code

**The adaptive window algorithm in `scripts/REFALT2haps.AdaptWindow.Single.R` is now working correctly after fixing the redundant constraint bug. DO NOT edit this code without understanding the big picture.**

### What We Are Trying to Achieve
1. **Progressive window expansion** - Start small (10kb) and grow to capture optimal founder separation
2. **Hierarchical clustering** - Use `h_cutoff` parameter to control founder grouping aggressiveness
3. **Smart constraint accumulation** - Preserve good founder separation from smaller windows
4. **Different results for different h_cutoff values** - This is the core goal that was broken before

### Why This Code is Critical
- **This is the core algorithm** for adaptive window haplotype estimation
- **It took significant debugging** to identify and fix the redundant constraint bug
- **Random edits can break the entire pipeline** and lose weeks of work
- **The algorithm works correctly now** - don't change it without understanding what it does

### What NOT to Do
- ❌ **Don't randomly change constraint logic** without understanding the algorithm
- ❌ **Don't modify the hierarchical clustering** without understanding why it's there
- ❌ **Don't change the window expansion logic** without understanding the progression
- ❌ **Don't edit this file** unless you're fixing a specific, identified bug

### What TO Do Instead
- ✅ **Read ADAPTIVE_WINDOW_ALGORITHM.md** to understand the algorithm
- ✅ **Test changes on small datasets** before modifying production code
- ✅ **Verify that different h_cutoff values still produce different results**
- ✅ **Document any changes** and why they were necessary

**Remember: The goal is to have an adaptive window algorithm that produces meaningfully different results for different h_cutoff values, not to randomly modify code that's already working.**

## Next Steps

### Current Phase (Next 4-8 hours)
1. **✅ Bug fix completed** - Production code updated with smart constraint logic
2. **🔄 Haplotype estimation + SNP imputation running** - Adaptive window methods (h4, h6, h8, h10) with `run_imputation=yes`
3. **Monitor progress** - Use summarize script to check pipeline status
4. **Wait for completion** - Both haplotype estimation and SNP imputation are running together

### Immediate Next (Next 1-2 days)
1. **Monitor pipeline completion** - Use `summarize_pipeline_results.R` to check status
2. **Evaluate results** - Use `evaluate_haplotype_methods.R` to confirm different performance across h_cutoff values
3. **Compare with previous results** - Demonstrate the bug fix worked
4. **Verify SNP imputation** - Check that imputed frequencies are reasonable

### Short Term (Next 3-5 days)
1. **Parameter optimization** - find optimal h_cutoff values for JUICE dataset
2. **Method comparison** - comprehensive evaluation of fixed vs adaptive methods
3. **Extend to other chromosomes** (chr2L, chr3L, chr3R, chrX)
4. **Genome-wide analysis** using best performing methods

### Medium Term (Next week)
1. **Performance profiling** - runtime and accuracy trade-offs across genome
2. **Documentation** - final algorithm description and usage guide
3. **Pipeline optimization** - streamline for large-scale analysis

## Technical Details

### Files Modified Today
- `scripts/REFALT2haps.AdaptWindow.Single.R` - **FIXED** redundant constraint bug
- `scripts/debug_and_testing/` - **ORGANIZED** all debugging scripts
- `ADAPTIVE_WINDOW_ALGORITHM.md` - Comprehensive algorithm documentation
- `CURRENT_STATUS.md` - This file, updated with current status



## Workflow Constraints

### Cluster Access
- **Results stay on cluster** - cannot download large .RDS files locally
- **Local development** - scripts developed locally, tested on cluster
- **Version control** - git push/pull for code synchronization
- **Local terminal commands limited** - cannot access cluster data or run cluster jobs locally

### Git Workflow Preferences
- **Preferred workflow**: `git add . && git commit -m "message" && git push origin main` (single command)
- **Avoid separate commands** - user prefers efficiency over step-by-step execution
- **Commit messages** should be descriptive and explain what was changed and why

### Data Processing
- **Raw REFALT files** - direct processing, no intermediate files
- **Euchromatin boundaries**:
  - chr2L: 82,455 to 22,011,009 bp
  - chr2R: 5,398,184 to 24,684,540 bp (current focus)
  - chr3L: 158,639 to 22,962,476 bp
  - chr3R: 4,552,934 to 31,845,060 bp
  - chrX: 277,911 to 22,628,490 bp
- **10kb step intervals** - comprehensive chromosome coverage

## Recent Debugging Insights - RESOLVED ✅

### The Redundant Constraint Bug - RESOLVED ✅
**What Was Happening**:
1. 10kb window: All founders in 1 group → added constraint "sum=1"
2. This constraint was **redundant** with the base constraint already enforced
3. **Matrix singularity** occurred due to colinear rows
4. LSEI failed or behaved unexpectedly, causing identical results

**The Fix Applied**:
- Only accumulate constraints when groups meaningfully change
- Skip LSEI when groups unchanged, reuse previous constraints
- Detect meaningful changes by group composition, not just count
- **Production code updated** with smart constraint detection

**Verification Results**:
- **h4 vs h10 now produce different results** (frequency differences: 0.055-0.118)
- **Algorithm working as designed** - different h_cutoff values matter
- **Pipeline re-execution in progress**

## Current Questions - RESOLVED ✅

1. **✅ Is the redundant constraint bug the root cause** of identical cluster results? **YES**
2. **✅ Will fixing this bug** restore different performance across h_cutoff values? **YES**
3. **✅ Should we update production code** or just test the fix locally first? **PRODUCTION CODE UPDATED**
4. **✅ What's the best approach** for detecting meaningful group changes? **IMPLEMENTED**

## Success Metrics

### Algorithm Working Correctly - COMPLETED ✅
- [x] Different h_cutoff values produce different results (verified in test)
- [x] Progressive window expansion shows meaningful group changes
- [x] Constraint accumulation works without matrix issues
- [x] Full founder separation achieved or max window size reached
- [x] **Bug fix implemented** in production code

### Pipeline Performance - IN PROGRESS 🔄
- [x] Bug fixed and production code updated
- [🔄] Haplotype estimation running for adaptive methods
- [ ] Different performance metrics across h_cutoff values (expected now)
- [ ] Reasonable runtime (not stuck in "doom loops")
- [ ] Full chromosome coverage achieved

### Code Quality - COMPLETED ✅
- [x] No redundant constraints
- [x] Smart LSEI execution (only when needed)
- [x] Proper error handling and edge cases
- [x] Clear documentation and testing
- [x] **Code cleanup completed** - debugging scripts organized

## Current Pipeline Status

**Status**: Bug fixed, production code updated, adaptive window haplotype estimation **RUNNING**.

**Current Jobs**: Array elements 6-9 (adaptive h4, h6, h8, h10) are processing.

**Next Steps**:
1. **Monitor haplotype estimation jobs** until completion
2. **Run SNP imputation** for all adaptive methods
3. **Re-evaluate results** to verify different performance across h_cutoff values
4. **Extend to other chromosomes** once chr2R is validated

**Expected Outcome**: Different performance metrics across h_cutoff values, resolving the mystery of identical adaptive window results.

### 8. File Structure
```
.
├── ADAPTIVE_WINDOW_ALGORITHM.md
├── CURRENT_STATUS.md
├── data/
│   ├── founders/
│   ├── NOT_founders/
│   └── raw/
├── helpfiles/
│   ├── flymap.r6.txt
│   ├── founder.bams.txt
│   ├── haplotype_params.2R.tsv
│   └── JUICE/
│       └── JUICE_haplotype_parameters.R
├── logs/                                # SLURM job logs (ROOT LEVEL)
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_1.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_1.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_2.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_2.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_3.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_3.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_4.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_4.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_5.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_5.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_6.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_6.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_7.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_7.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_8.err
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_8.out
│   ├── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_9.err
│   └── haplotype_pipeline_<job_id>_9.out
├── process/
│   └── JUICE/
│       ├── haplotype_results/           # All results stored here
│       │   ├── adaptive_window_h10_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── adaptive_window_h4_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── adaptive_window_h6_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── adaptive_window_h8_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── fixed_window_100kb_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── fixed_window_200kb_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── fixed_window_20kb_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── fixed_window_500kb_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── fixed_window_50kb_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── haplotype_evaluation_detailed_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── haplotype_evaluation_plots_chr2R.png
│       │   ├── haplotype_evaluation_regional_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── haplotype_evaluation_summary_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── sliding_window_plot_chr2R.png
│       │   ├── sliding_window_results_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── sliding_window_summary_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_adaptive_h10_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_adaptive_h4_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_adaptive_h6_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_adaptive_h8_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_fixed_100kb_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_fixed_200kb_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_fixed_20kb_chr2R.RDS
│       │   ├── snp_imputation_fixed_500kb_chr2R.RDS
│       │   └── snp_imputation_fixed_50kb_chr2R.RDS
│       └── RefAlt.chr2R.txt            # Raw REFALT data
├── ref/
├── scripts/
│   ├── debug_and_testing/              # Debugging scripts organized here
│   ├── haps2scan/
│   ├── raw2bam2REFALT/
│   ├── old_REFALT2haps/
│   ├── Heterozygosity_tests/
│   ├── REFALT2haps.AdaptWindow.Single.R
│   ├── evaluate_haplotype_methods.R
│   ├── REFALT2haps.FixedWindow.Single.R
│   ├── haplotype_testing_from_table.sh
│   └── euchromatic_SNP_imputation_single.R
```

**CRITICAL: Results are in `process/JUICE/haplotype_results/`, logs are in `logs/` (root level)**

## Complete Pipeline Commands - From Start to Finish

### 1. Run Full Pipeline (All Methods)
```bash
# Haplotype estimation + SNP imputation for ALL methods (array 1-9)
sbatch --array=1-9 scripts/haplotype_testing_from_table.sh helpfiles/haplotype_params.2R.tsv helpfiles/JUICE/JUICE_haplotype_parameters.R process/JUICE yes

# Haplotype estimation ONLY for ALL methods (array 1-9)
sbatch --array=1-9 scripts/haplotype_testing_from_table.sh helpfiles/haplotype_params.2R.tsv helpfiles/JUICE/JUICE_haplotype_parameters.R process/JUICE
```

### 2. Run Subset Pipeline (Current Run)
```bash
# Haplotype estimation + SNP imputation for ADAPTIVE methods only (array 6-9)
sbatch --array=6,7,8,9 scripts/haplotype_testing_from_table.sh helpfiles/haplotype_params.2R.tsv helpfiles/JUICE/JUICE_haplotype_parameters.R process/JUICE yes
```

### 3. Evaluate Results (After Pipeline Completes)
```bash
# Quick pipeline summary
Rscript scripts/summarize_pipeline_results.R process/JUICE chr2R

# Comprehensive evaluation
Rscript scripts/evaluate_haplotype_methods.R chr2R helpfiles/JUICE/JUICE_haplotype_parameters.R process/JUICE
```

### 4. Extend to Other Chromosomes
**To extend to other chromosomes, simply add rows to the existing parameter file:**

1. **Edit `helpfiles/haplotype_params.2R.tsv`** to add rows for other chromosomes
2. **Drop some estimation methods** to focus on finding optimal combinations
3. **Run the same pipeline command** - SLURM will process all rows in the file

**Note: The filename `haplotype_params.2R.tsv` is misleading since it will contain parameters for all chromosomes. Consider renaming to something like `haplotype_params.tsv` or `haplotype_params.all_chromosomes.tsv`.**

**Example parameter file structure:**
```tsv
chr2R	fixed	20
chr2R	fixed	50
chr2R	fixed	100
chr2R	adaptive	4
chr2R	adaptive	6
chr2L	fixed	50
chr2L	adaptive	6
chr3L	fixed	50
chr3L	adaptive	6
```

**Then run the full pipeline:**
```bash
sbatch --array=1-9 scripts/haplotype_testing_from_table.sh helpfiles/haplotype_params.2R.tsv helpfiles/JUICE/JUICE_haplotype_parameters.R process/JUICE yes
```

**The pipeline automatically processes all rows in the parameter file - no need for separate commands per chromosome.**
